.\" pgwd(1) - Postgres Watch Dog
.\" Manual page for pgwd
.TH PGWD 1 "2026-03-22" "pgwd v0.5.8" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pgwd \- monitor PostgreSQL connections and notify via Slack/Loki
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pgwd
[\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pgwd
(Postgres Watch Dog) is a Go CLI that monitors PostgreSQL connection counts
(total, active, idle, stale) and notifies via Slack and/or Loki when
configured thresholds are exceeded. It does not terminate connections; it
only observes and alerts.
.PP
All options can be set via config file, CLI flag, or environment variable
(prefix
.BR PGWD_ ).
When a config file is loaded, env vars are ignored; config file is the single source.
When no config file exists, env vars apply. CLI flags always override.
Use
.BR \-config
to specify a custom config path (default:
.I /etc/pgwd/pgwd.conf ).
See
.I contrib/pgwd.conf.example .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-config " \fIpath\fR"
Config file path (YAML). Default: /etc/pgwd/pgwd.conf. Env: PGWD_CONFIG.
.TP
.BR \-db\-url " \fIurl\fR"
PostgreSQL connection URL (required). Env: PGWD_DB_URL.
.TP
.BR \-kube\-postgres " \fInamespace/type/name\fR"
Connect via kubectl port-forward (e.g. default/svc/postgres). Env: PGWD_KUBE_POSTGRES.
.TP
.BR \-kube\-loki " \fInamespace/type/name\fR"
Connect to Loki via kubectl port-forward when Loki is inside the cluster.
Mutually exclusive with \-notifications-loki-url. Env: PGWD_KUBE_LOKI.
.TP
.BR \-kube\-loki\-local\-port " \fIN\fR"
Local port for Loki port-forward (default 3100). Env: PGWD_KUBE_LOKI_LOCAL_PORT.
.TP
.BR \-kube\-loki\-remote\-port " \fIN\fR"
Remote port on Loki service (default 3100). Env: PGWD_KUBE_LOKI_REMOTE_PORT.
.TP
.BR \-kube\-context " \fIcontext\fR"
Kubectl context to use (empty = current). Env: PGWD_KUBE_CONTEXT.
.TP
.BR \-kube\-local\-port " \fIN\fR"
Local port for Postgres port-forward (default 5432). Env: PGWD_KUBE_LOCAL_PORT.
.TP
.BR \-kube\-password\-var " \fIvar\fR"
Pod env var for password when URL has DISCOVER_MY_PASSWORD (default POSTGRES_PASSWORD). Env: PGWD_KUBE_PASSWORD_VAR.
.TP
.BR \-kube\-password\-container " \fIname\fR"
Container name in pod for password discovery. Env: PGWD_KUBE_PASSWORD_CONTAINER.
.TP
.BR \-validate\-k8s\-access
Validate kubectl connectivity and list pods, then exit. Env: PGWD_VALIDATE_K8S_ACCESS.
.TP
.BR \-client " \fIname\fR"
Custom name for this monitor instance — REQUIRED. Identifies which monitor sent the alert. Cluster name is computed from kubeconfig when using \-kube-postgres; not configurable. Env: PGWD_CLIENT.
.TP
.BR \-db\-threshold\-total " \fIN\fR"
Alert when total connections >= N. Deprecated: use \-db-threshold-levels; will be removed in v1.0.0. Env: PGWD_DB_THRESHOLD_TOTAL.
.TP
.BR \-db\-threshold\-active " \fIN\fR"
Alert when active connections >= N. Deprecated: use \-db-threshold-levels; will be removed in v1.0.0. Env: PGWD_DB_THRESHOLD_ACTIVE.
.TP
.BR \-db\-threshold\-levels " \fI75,85,95\fR"
Comma-separated percentages for 3-tier alerts (attention/alert/danger). Default: 75,85,95. Env: PGWD_DB_THRESHOLD_LEVELS.
.TP
.BR \-db\-threshold\-idle " \fIN\fR"
Alert when idle connections >= N. Env: PGWD_DB_THRESHOLD_IDLE.
.TP
.BR \-db\-stale\-age " \fIN\fR"
Consider connection stale if open longer than N seconds. Env: PGWD_DB_STALE_AGE.
.TP
.BR \-db\-threshold\-stale " \fIN\fR"
Alert when stale connections >= N. Env: PGWD_DB_THRESHOLD_STALE.
.TP
.BR \-notifications\-slack\-webhook " \fIurl\fR"
Slack Incoming Webhook URL. Env: PGWD_NOTIFICATIONS_SLACK_WEBHOOK.
.TP
.BR \-notifications\-loki\-url " \fIurl\fR"
Loki push API URL (e.g. http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push). Env: PGWD_NOTIFICATIONS_LOKI_URL.
.TP
.BR \-notifications\-loki\-labels " \fIkey=val,...\fR"
Loki labels (e.g. app=pgwd,env=prod). Env: PGWD_NOTIFICATIONS_LOKI_LABELS.
.TP
.BR \-notifications\-loki\-org\-id " \fIid\fR"
Loki X-Scope-OrgID header (multi-tenancy). Env: PGWD_NOTIFICATIONS_LOKI_ORG_ID.
.TP
.BR \-notifications\-loki\-bearer\-token " \fItoken\fR"
Loki Authorization: Bearer token. Env: PGWD_NOTIFICATIONS_LOKI_BEARER_TOKEN.
.TP
.BR \-interval " \fIN\fR"
Run every N seconds; 0 = run once. Env: PGWD_INTERVAL.
.TP
.BR \-dry\-run
Only print stats, do not send notifications. Env: PGWD_DRY_RUN.
.TP
.BR \-force\-notification
Always send a test notification to validate delivery. Env: PGWD_FORCE_NOTIFICATION.
.TP
.BR \-notify\-on\-connect\-failure
Send an alert to notifiers when Postgres connection fails (infrastructure alert). Env: PGWD_NOTIFY_ON_CONNECT_FAILURE.
.TP
.BR \-db\-default\-threshold\-percent " \fIN\fR"
When one of total/active is 0, set it to this % of max_connections (1-100, default 80). Env: PGWD_DB_DEFAULT_THRESHOLD_PERCENT.
.TP
.BR \-test\-max\-connections " \fIN\fR"
Override server max_connections for testing alerts. Env: PGWD_TEST_MAX_CONNECTIONS.
.TP
.BR \-version
Print version and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Minimal one-shot with Slack:
.RS
pgwd \-client my-monitor \-db-url "postgres://user:pass@localhost:5432/mydb" \e
     \-notifications-slack-webhook "https://hooks.slack.com/services/..."
.RE
.TP
Daemon every 60s with Loki:
.RS
pgwd \-client my-monitor \-db-url "postgres://..." \-notifications-loki-url "http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push" \e
     \-interval 60
.RE
.TP
Postgres and Loki in Kubernetes (cluster from kubeconfig):
.RS
pgwd \-client my-monitor \-kube-postgres default/svc/postgres \-kube-loki monitoring/svc/loki \e
     \-db-url "postgres://postgres:DISCOVER_MY_PASSWORD@localhost:5432/mydb" \e
     \-notifications-slack-webhook "https://..."
.RE
.TP
Dry run (no notifications):
.RS
pgwd \-client my-monitor \-db-url "postgres://..." \-dry-run
.RE
.SH FILES
.I /etc/pgwd/pgwd.conf
Configuration file (YAML). See contrib/pgwd.conf.example.
Platform-specific setup (rc.d, systemd, SMF): contrib/freebsd/README.md,
contrib/netbsd/README.md, contrib/dragonflybsd/README.md, contrib/openbsd/README.md,
contrib/solaris/README.md.
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 on success; non-zero on fatal errors (e.g. DB connection failure).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR kubectl (1),
.BR postgres (1)
.PP
Full documentation: https://github.com/hrodrig/pgwd
.SH AUTHOR
Hermes Rodríguez <https://github.com/hrodrig>
